Unified Reservoir, Validity, and Reuse Contract
===============================================

Goal
----

Represent one selected light-transport contribution per receiver in a shared
direct/global reservoir while preserving enough information for later temporal
and spatial path shifting. The initial version must be useful without reuse.

Logical selected sample
-----------------------

The logical contract needs these categories. Physical packing is frozen only
after UPT-02 proves round trip and bandwidth.

    selected event kind
        analytic NEE, emissive, environment, or indirect continuation

    selected source identity
        stable light identity/sample parameters for explicit lights, or replay
        seed/index and path/reconnection metadata for path events

    translated/reconnection vertex
        position/direction representation plus normal when applicable

    contribution state
        radiance/throughput representation and target function

    estimator state
        weight sum/final reservoir weight, effective M, age, and flags

    shift state
        proposal/reconnection PDF terms, partial Jacobian, path length, and
        reconnection vertex length needed by the accepted shift mapping

    replay/termination state
        compact replay seed/index or equivalent deterministic key plus enough
        path-PDF state to reproduce a bounded path without roulette dimensions;
        do not assume every selected indirect path has exactly one continuation

    classification state
        direct/global and diffuse/specular classification required for output
        decomposition; do not store data that final resolve can derive cheaply

Target packed stride:

    no more than 64 bytes per pixel unless an explicit field/quality proof
    demonstrates that a larger record is worth its bandwidth and memory cost.

Do not freeze field widths by copying the NVIDIA packed ABI. Derive a
rbdoom-owned packing, document every quantization, and test encode/decode error.

Candidate status: mandatory three-state model
---------------------------------------------

Every proposal is classified before reservoir streaming:

    INVALID
        There is no well-defined Monte Carlo candidate. Examples: invalid light
        identity, missing surface, invalid replay metadata, non-positive or
        non-finite proposal PDF where a PDF is required, NaN/Inf state, stale
        generation, impossible path topology, failed decode.

        Contract: do not increment M, do not add weight, do not set identity,
        and do not allow selection.

    VALID_ZERO
        The sampling procedure produced a mathematically defined candidate but
        its contribution/target is zero, such as a valid direction with zero
        BSDF support or a visibility result that is legitimately occluded.

        Contract: cannot be selected, contributes zero weight, and increments
        logical effective M while candidates are streamed. This keeps a defined
        zero trial in the denominator when another positive candidate is stored.
        Do not silently treat it as INVALID merely to brighten the image.

    VALID_POSITIVE
        Identity, PDFs, target, contribution, and required metadata are finite
        and coherent, with positive selectable weight.

        Contract: may increment effective M and participate in weighted sample
        selection.

The update function accepts CandidateStatus explicitly. It must not infer
validity solely from radiance, a packed valid bit, or M after mutation.

Reservoir validity
------------------

A stored reservoir is valid only when all are true:

    a selected sample identity exists;
    effective M is positive and finite/in-range;
    stored weight/final multiplier is finite and positive;
    selected target is finite and positive;
    event-specific identity/replay fields pass validation;
    generation/domain flags match the current interpretation.

An empty reservoir is a single canonical all-zero/known-tag representation:

    no selected identity
    M = 0
    weight = 0
    age = 0
    no boost/history authority

Empty writes are mandatory for invalid receivers and receivers with no selected
sample. Do not leave a previous frame's bytes in place.

UPT-06 adds a distinct count-only representation without changing the 64-byte
stride. Low bits 0..1 encode the base tag: 0 is empty/no defined trial, 1 is a
selected sample, and 2 is count-only. UPT-07 assigns bit 2 as the orthogonal
needs-rescue flag for records without a selected sample; bit 3 remains reserved.
Therefore word0=4 is rescue-only and word0=6 is count-only plus rescue. A
count-only record stores only a positive M in word1; words2..15 must be zero and
it has no selectable identity, weight, target, age, or history authority. The
initial path-tree proposal set is collapsed to one reservoir candidate, so a
zero-only initial result stores M = 1. This preserves the normalization evidence
needed when valid history is later combined with a current zero contribution
while keeping invalid receivers as all-zero canonical empty.

The rescue bit is not history validity and is never an epoch. It only asks the
later bounded spatial policy to spend its rescue budget at this receiver. A
selected sample continues to use the six selected-candidate flags in bits
12..17; no selected-sample flag was repurposed.

Initial unified sampling contract
---------------------------------

For every valid primary receiver:

1. Ask the selected MaterialSet to decode the receiver and return a typed,
   transport-neutral material interaction handle/result.
2. Generate only the configured reference-justified candidate families.
3. Classify each proposal INVALID / VALID_ZERO / VALID_POSITIVE before update.
4. Stream direct and global candidates through one update contract.
5. Finalize once after all admitted candidates.
6. If defined trials occurred but nothing selectable survived, store count-only
   M = 1 with no identity.
7. If no defined trial occurred, store canonical empty.
8. Otherwise store exactly one selected shared reservoir.

The reservoir/update/reuse modules may consume material-evaluation results such
as value, PDF, lobe/event flags, emission, and validity. They may not inspect a
Lambert/OpenPBR closure layout or implement a BSDF. Material sampling receives a
named random-dimension slice from the pass; it may not advance a hidden global
RNG and thereby reorder ReSTIR decisions.

The one-bounce implementation may use narrower runtime control flow, but the
logical selected-sample contract and proposed packing are tested with path
lengths through the mapped three-bounce target. Path length is data, not an
event-kind alias such as direct versus first-indirect. A later three-bounce
specialization must not require a second reservoir type or reinterpret existing
packed fields.

Russian roulette is transport sampling, not a reservoir candidate family:

    a roulette rejection terminates future continuation work;
    it is not streamed as an INVALID or VALID_ZERO reservoir candidate merely
        because the path ended;
    already produced candidates remain valid;
    any candidate produced after surviving roulette includes the survival
        probability in its path PDF/throughput exactly once;
    replay and receiver-domain re-evaluation consume the stored accumulated
        survival-probability semantics without replaying roulette decisions;
    if defined candidates exist but none is selectable, count-only M = 1 is
        written; canonical empty remains reserved for no defined trial.

The initial pass must expose counters for:

    valid/invalid receiver
    each candidate status by event kind
    selected event kind
    canonical empty output
    emitted ray category

Counters are debug-only and must not alter production timing.

Direct/global unification rule
------------------------------

"Unified" means that the primary NEE candidate and candidates produced along
the BSDF continuation path are streamed through one reservoir. It does not mean
adding precomputed DI and GI radiance and putting the sum into a struct.

The Enhanced reference unifies the path tree, not a tagged union of separate
DI and GI estimators. A direct-light result is the k=2 short path produced when
the same NEE construction is admitted at x1; longer results extend the same
path with x2..xk. eventKind remains a codec/replay detail in the current proof
lane. It must not become the production estimator partition or select a
tag-specific MIS/reuse formula. The production lane selects short and long
paths in the same initial path-resampling domain.

At each admitted path vertex, NEE is evaluated in addition to the bounded BSDF
continuation. For k_max = 2 the path tree is primary NEE at x1, one continuation
x1 -> x2, and (for an opaque x2) NEE at x2. A miss or emissive x2 contributes
the continuation-technique endpoint candidate. An emissive opaque x2 may
contribute both its endpoint and its x2 NEE candidate. All candidates share one
weighted streaming update and the finalized initial confidence is c = 1.

Each candidate must record:

    its sampling probability including light/lobe selection;
    target evaluation at the receiver;
    visibility policy;
    stable identity or replay state;
    how the selected contribution is reconstructed by final resolve.

The sampling technique is distinct from direct/global classification:

    tau = 1    the final vertex was reached by NEE
    tau = 2    the final vertex was reached by BSDF continuation

When the same geometric path is reachable by both techniques, apply the balance
heuristic m_tau = c_tau / (c_1 + c_2) from their exact strategy PDFs. A disabled
technique creates no zero placeholder. Direct-only and indirect-only are static
diagnostic/measurement compositions, not probabilities in a top-level XOR
mixture.

No-reuse final estimate
-----------------------

Before temporal/spatial exist, final resolve reads the initial reservoir and
reconstructs the selected contribution. It traces no new ray because the
selected initial path/connection was already evaluated under the initial
visibility policy.

This image is the first required quality/performance checkpoint. Compare:

    mean energy and event decomposition against a brute/reference mode;
    ray counts against the initial ray ledger;
    direct-only, indirect-only, and unified mixture views;
    empty-reservoir map;
    finite-value and weight distributions.

Temporal contract planned now
-----------------------------

Temporal reuse is not implemented in the baseline, but its ownership is fixed:

    current receiver may have a valid or empty initial reservoir;
    previous history is searched around the reprojected location;
    previous surface and reservoir must both validate;
    invalid current does not prevent valid history from becoming the result;
    invalid history never increases M or age;
    selected history is shifted/re-evaluated at the current receiver;
    age/history caps apply only to valid selected history;
    if current and history contain no selected sample, output preserves current
        count-only M when present and sets the reservoir-local needs-rescue bit;
        it is rescue-only word0=4 when M is zero, not canonical all-zero empty;
    scene, light-universe, material, resolution, camera-cut, or ABI generation
        changes reject history before any sample metadata is consumed.

Temporal fallback taps are history candidates, not a license to borrow an
incompatible previous pixel. Each tap must validate surface compatibility and
reservoir validity independently.

Spatial contract planned now
----------------------------

Spatial reuse operates on a valid receiver surface even when its center
reservoir is empty.

Required behavior:

    do not early-return because center reservoir is invalid;
    search neighbor locations according to a pluggable neighbor policy;
    reject invalid neighbor surfaces/reservoirs without adding to M;
    evaluate compatibility before expensive path shift work where possible;
    shift/reconnect the neighbor sample into the receiver domain;
    re-evaluate target/PDF/Jacobian at the receiver;
    perform required visibility/invertibility validation;
    only then stream it as a candidate;
    if no valid neighbor survives, preserve canonical empty;
    never copy a neighbor's shaded radiance as though it belonged to the
        receiver.

Neighbor policy interface reserved from the start:

    baseline random/disc selection
    reciprocal neighbor selection from ReSTIR PT Enhanced
    optional compatibility-guided preselection

The spatial algorithm must not hard-code one policy into reservoir math. The
policy returns candidate coordinates; the common validation/shift/update path
owns correctness.

Reciprocal selection is the first production target because the public Enhanced
paper reports roughly halving spatial reuse cost. Compatibility-guided
selection is a later measured alternative; it may not add unbounded taps or
extra rays without a ledger update.

Adaptive rescue budget
----------------------

Neighbor attempts depend on reservoir-local state:

    valid mature center       minimal accepted neighbor count
    valid but low confidence  increased bounded count
    empty/disoccluded center  bounded rescue count

The maximum is compile-time bounded and appears in the ray/dispatch ledger.
Rejected neighbors should normally cost surface/reservoir reads, not rays.
Only the small accepted subset may perform expensive shift/reconnection work.

Reservoir page schedules
------------------------

Baseline, no reuse:

    page 0 <- initial
    resolve reads page 0
    UPT-04/05 allocated pages: 1
    UPT-06 admitted physical pages: 2; page 1 remains metadata-invalid and is
        neither bound nor cleared until reuse owns a full-domain producer

Temporal only:

    two pages with roles flipped each frame
    current page <- initial
    temporal reads current + history and overwrites current per-pixel
    resolve reads current
    next frame swaps current/history roles

    Gate: in-place temporal output is accepted only after proving no invocation
    reads another pixel from the current initial page after that pixel may have
    been overwritten. Previous-history neighborhood reads remain on the other
    page.

Spatial only:

    page 0 <- initial
    page 1 <- spatial(page 0)
    resolve reads page 1

Temporal + spatial:

    page 0 <- initial
    page 0 <- temporal(page 0 current, page 1 previous history)
    full barrier
    page 1 <- spatial(page 0)
    resolve reads page 1
    page 1 becomes next-frame history

No third full-resolution scratch reservoir is admitted unless the two-page
schedule is proven unsafe.

Full coverage, invalidation, and clear prohibition
--------------------------------------------------

Every full-resolution UPT buffer must satisfy one of two contracts:

    its producer writes every in-domain element every frame, including an
        explicit canonical invalid/no-data value; or
    a consumer validates an explicit stamp before reading any element that a
        sparse producer may have skipped.

The reservoir pages use the first contract. Initial, temporal, and spatial
producers write one selected or all-zero canonical-empty record for every pixel
in their output domain. Therefore camera cuts, scene/material/light changes,
ordinary history resets, and feature toggles must never call clearBufferUInt on
a full reservoir page. The current UPT-04 allocation-time clear exists only to
make partial watchdog proof stages deterministic before the first full-frame
write; it is not part of steady-state rendering or future invalidation.

All records in one physical reservoir page share one small logical page-metadata
record. It contains at least:

    whether a full producer dispatch completed/was admitted for the page;
    a full-width proposal/content generation covering ABI, scene, geometry,
        material, texture, light, provider, family, and transport policy; and
    a monotonic camera-cut/history epoch.

The metadata may remain host-owned if temporal admission can reject a history
page uniformly through dispatch control; do not allocate a GPU header merely to
mirror host state. If a GPU record is later justified, it is one small record
per physical page, not a generation field in every 64-byte pixel reservoir.
Generation mismatch makes the whole history page unavailable before sample
metadata is consumed. Invalidation updates this metadata; it does not touch the
225 MiB page at 2560x1440.

Ordinary camera motion is not a history reset. A live camera-projection hash
changes while moving and therefore cannot be used as the page history epoch.
Temporal admission requires a separately published monotonic camera-cut/history
generation. Resolution changes recreate output-sized pages and metadata.

Packed word0 bit 0 remains only per-pixel selected-sample validity. Bit 1 is the
mutually exclusive count-only base tag admitted by UPT-06. UPT-07 assigns bit 2
as needs-rescue only when bit 0 is clear; bit 3 remains reserved. None of bits
1..3 is a rolling epoch. A narrow rolling value would wrap and
cannot provide lifetime-safe staleness rejection. The
compile-time kUpt03ExpectedGeneration validates candidate construction but is
not stored in the packed reservoir and is not a runtime history stamp.

The compact32 primary receiver likewise must not acquire a per-pixel history
epoch by assumption. Its 16-bit header currently consists of a 15-bit version
domain plus one valid bit; the 15 spare-bit observation applies only to the
older compact48 header. Primary-history validity is page/producer metadata plus
per-pixel surface validity, motion, identity, depth, and normal tests.

Future sparse reconnection/secondary-surface sidecars cannot rely on page
metadata alone because skipped elements can be stale within an otherwise
current page. They require a sufficiently wide per-record stamp with a proven
non-wrapping lifetime, a measured compact active representation, or full-domain
canonical-invalid writes. An unproven 3-bit or 8-bit rolling stamp is rejected.

Output and denoiser-guide textures follow the same rule. Producers must cover
the full output domain and encode no-data in-band (for example, zero hit
distance where that guide contract defines zero as invalid); conditional guide
paths may not be repaired with a full-texture clear.

Duplication map implementation and proof contract
-------------------------------------------------

UPT-08 is implemented behind r_pathTracingUnifiedPtDuplication and its accepted
sub-policy default is on. It is required for the opt-in sustained temporal+
spatial loop; it is not an optional cosmetic optimization. Turning it off is a
diagnostic A/B and must remove its resources and dispatches completely.

The admitted layout is the explicit two-pass compact-ID route:

    U0 FillSampleID reads the final 64-byte reservoir page and writes one R32
        stable random-sample ID per selected non-rescue reservoir. Invalid,
        count-only, canonical-empty, and one-frame rescue records write zero.

    U1 ComputeDuplication reads those IDs through a 24x24 groupshared tile per
        8x8 output group, counts equal nonzero IDs in the surrounding 17x17
        window excluding the center (288 possible neighbors), and stores
        round(255 * count / 288) as four packed UNORM8 scores per uint.

The score has two physical pages and page metadata matching the reservoir page:
extent, content generation, history epoch, and frame serial must all agree.
The transient R32 ID buffer and both score pages are fully overwritten and are
never cleared per frame. At 2560x1440 their total footprint is approximately
22.1 MB: 14.7 MB transient IDs plus 7.4 MB for two packed score pages.

T0 reads the score at the history pixel actually selected by reprojection. With
c = score / 255, the local history-M cap is

    round(lerp(min(maximumHistoryM, 20), 1, pow(c, 0.1)))

clamped to at least one. Twenty is the reference uncorrelated default; a lower
user maximum remains authoritative. A missing, stale, or mismatched score page disables
only the adaptive cap; it never invalidates otherwise usable reservoir history.
The disabled path allocates no UPT-08 resources and has no U0/U1 dispatch cost.

Acceptance considers U0+U1 dispatch time, bandwidth, runaway suppression, and
localized energy loss. The control must be A/B tested with identical D0/T0/S0
settings in cutout/grate and dissimilar-light-domain scenes; reducing the global
maximumHistoryM is not an equivalent quality-preserving solution.

Bias/robustness prohibitions
----------------------------

Do not:

    count structurally invalid candidates to inflate confidence;
    drop valid-zero samples from normalization without derivation;
    invent weight clamps to hide NaNs;
    admit a neighbor before receiver-domain target evaluation;
    use history age as validity;
    accept stale light IDs after universe remap;
    make an empty center ineligible for neighbor rescue;
    add extra visibility rays for segments already traced and unchanged;
    normalize by requested neighbor count instead of admitted technique/sample
        counts required by the estimator;
    or use temporal/spatial reuse to conceal a broken initial estimator.

Persisted one-continuation replay seed, 2026-08-09
--------------------------------------------------

The accepted one-continuation sample now satisfies the replay-state gate. D0
constructs replayKey from source pixel plus frame sample, stores frame sample
as replayIndex, and derives every global-path random dimension from only those
two persisted words. The original pixel is deliberately absent from the
replay RNG. The replayKey high bit remains exclusively UPT-09's rescue stamp
and is masked before RNG evaluation.

The persisted seed owns primary lobe selection, continuation U/V, every
secondary NEE identity and surface-coordinate draw, and every inner-RIS
selection draw. D0 still uses all of those dimensions. UPT-15 no longer needs
to rebuild inner RIS during reuse: secondary NEE stores raw contribution/target
and carries the algebraically equivalent inner normalization in proposalPdf.
Temporal can therefore force-reconnect the stored selected light and evaluate
its physical target directly. Direct D0 random dimensions and the frozen
64-byte reservoir layout are unchanged. See document 29 for the equivalence
proof and history-generation boundary.

Any future continuation/roulette dimension must be added to this same
persisted-key namespace before the event may carry Replayable|NeedsShift.
Reconstructing a new random value from the destination pixel is invalid.
