UPT-10 Monolithic-First Unified DI/GI Optimization Plan
=======================================================

Date: 2026-08-09

Purpose
-------

Reduce the cost of the working one-continuation unified DI/GI renderer without
prematurely replacing its monolithic dispatches. ReSTIR PT Enhanced unifies the
estimator, reservoir, temporal history, spatial history, and final shading. It
does not require all work to reside in one shader, but neither does it justify
a split until redundant work inside the current monolithic implementation has
been removed and remeasured.

The accepted functional baseline must remain unchanged:

    one shared direct/global reservoir stream;
    direct k=2 and indirect k>=3 path candidates in one outer RIS;
    exact current emissive CDF and D0 previous-best reseed;
    compact32 receiver and cold history sidecar;
    proposal-parity, target-PDF-parity, and duplication contracts;
    closest-hit continuation traversal and alpha-aware visibility;
    no per-frame full-buffer clear;
    bounded existing D0/T0/S0 ray ceilings;
    Vulkan only.

Measured starting point
-----------------------

At 2560x1440 with temporal and spatial disabled, the supplied Nsight captures
reported:

    proposal parity 1, family 0 unified        29.86 ms
    proposal parity 1, family 1 direct-only     5.12 ms
    proposal parity 1, family 2 indirect-only  11.77 ms
    proposal parity 0, family 0 unified        29.96 ms
    proposal parity 0, family 1 direct-only    14.38 ms
    proposal parity 0, family 2 indirect-only  14.38 ms

The parity-1 unified shader is 12.97 ms slower than its two specialized family
times combined. Shader-source sampling attributes roughly 60.67 percent of
stalls to No Instructions, 12.44 percent to Long Scoreboard, and 12.09 percent
to Wait. This proves a serious current shader problem, but does not prove that
direct and indirect execution must be split.

The reference paper's approximately 2.74x average cost-reduction result is
cumulative. For the present one-continuation renderer, the relevant structural
gain is the removal of a separate ReSTIR DI initial/temporal/spatial/shading
chain. Initial-only Russian roulette is deferred until multiple bounces exist.

Primary hypothesis
------------------

The current unified shaders repeat receiver preparation and retain more
material/candidate state than necessary inside the light-candidate loops.
The strongest concrete instance is secondary NEE: every candidate currently
reloads the same material and can resample the same diffuse and specular
textures. The material is invariant for all light proposals at that secondary
hit. The RTXDI path-tracer bridge instead resolves a secondary RAB surface once
and reuses that prepared surface for its complete NEE schedule.

The first optimization family therefore removes repeated work while retaining
the monolithic dispatch and exact estimator. Dispatch splitting, work queues,
and compacted replay lists remain later evidence-gated alternatives.

Ordered work
------------

UPT-10A - Prepared direct receiver closure

1. Add a transport-facing prepared-direct-material value to the existing
   material-provider contract.
2. Resolve and validate the primary receiver once before the direct RIS loop.
3. Resolve the secondary material and its texture inputs once after the
   continuation hit and before the secondary NEE RIS loop.
4. Evaluate only direction- and radiance-dependent OpenPBR terms per light
   candidate.
5. Keep exact RGB contribution, scalar target, directional PDF, lobe mask,
   MIS, UCW conversion, visibility selection, and reservoir ordering
   unchanged.
6. Preserve the old evaluator entry points as wrappers for temporal, spatial,
   diagnostic, and deterministic callers until each is migrated deliberately.

Static gates:

    focused UPT-04 shader build and verification pass;
    UPT-04 CPU contract harness passes unchanged;
    64-byte reservoir and compact32 receiver reflection unchanged;
    RayQuery count and D0 maximum ray ceiling unchanged;
    no new descriptor, buffer, clear, barrier, or dispatch;
    production shader closes over the same light/material resources.

Runtime gates:

    fixed-sample family-0 image has no energy or identity change;
    emissive, analytic, endpoint, and secondary NEE debug views agree;
    mirror geometry/material and alpha-cutout regression scenes remain fixed;
    family 0/1/2 parity-1 and parity-0 D0 markers are recaptured;
    shader-source stalls and live-register count are recorded.

UPT-10B - Candidate live-range and repeated-math reduction

Only after 10A evidence:

1. Separate immutable receiver closure from selected-candidate state so the
   full proposal record is not kept live across unrelated work.
2. Hoist light-range, candidate-count, proposal-mixture, and material-invariant
   OpenPBR terms out of loops where static inspection proves equivalence.
3. Replace avoidable branches with selection operations only when generated
   SPIR-V and fixed-sample output prove the change.
4. Keep pHat = luminance/max of the exact F convention selected by the active
   parity policy. Do not invent a cheaper approximate target in this slice.
5. Keep selected-only visibility and never add visibility to every candidate.

UPT-10C - Production specialization cleanup

1. Confirm family specialization removes unreachable direct or indirect code
   from family 1 and family 2 blobs.
2. Remove production reachability of diagnostics, proof-only branches, and
   inactive policy implementations where specialization constants already fix
   their values.
3. Compare blob size, instruction count, register attribution, and pass time.
4. Do not remove accepted proposal-parity, compact32, duplication, or replay
   variants; make them compile-time-specialized rather than dynamically live.

UPT-10D - Temporal and spatial prepared replay

After D0 is accepted, apply the same invariant-work rule independently to T0
and S0:

    prepare each current/history receiver once;
    resolve each replayed secondary material once per shifted path;
    do not repeat texture decode for the inner light schedule;
    retain current-domain target evaluation and exact shift/Jacobian rules;
    retain deferred BASIC reciprocal replay where selection allows it;
    preserve rejection rather than admitting unsupported history.

Each pass receives its own fixed-sample, energy, rejection-diagnostic, and
Nsight gate. A D0 improvement does not authorize an unmeasured T0/S0 rewrite.

UPT-10E - Monolithic acceptance or split escalation

Re-evaluate the monolithic renderer only after 10A through 10D have removed
proven redundant work. Keep it when:

    unified time is close to shared setup plus useful direct/indirect work;
    active threads, register pressure, and instruction availability are sane;
    no full-frame intermediate traffic is needed;
    fixed-sample output and estimator statistics remain exact.

Escalate to a physical split only if the cleaned monolithic shader still shows
an intrinsic fusion penalty such as instruction-cache pressure, excessive
register allocation, or path-class divergence. First remeasure the existing
r_pathTracingUnifiedPtSplitInitial implementation. Any accepted split must:

    retain one outer unified reservoir, not separate DI and GI reservoirs;
    preserve candidate order, M, weight sum, random dimensions, and MIS;
    include intermediate barriers and traffic in its timing;
    win on the complete D0a + barrier + D0b marker sum;
    avoid a new full-frame queue unless compacted useful work repays it.

Deferred work
-------------

The following are not part of the current one-bounce optimization sequence:

    multi-bounce transport;
    initial-only Russian roulette;
    forced NEE reconnection for long replay paths;
    generic wavefront path tracing;
    approximate target functions;
    broader portal/light filtering;
    extra random candidates;
    denoiser compensation.

Build, deployment, and checkpoint
---------------------------------

Build from neo:

    cmake --build --preset win64-pt-dev-release

Deploy only:

    build-win64-pt-dev/Release/RBDoom3BFG.exe
        -> E:/prog/rbdoom-3-BFG-prebuilt/RBDoom3BFG.exe

and Vulkan blobs actually rebuilt under:

    base/renderprogs2/spirv/

Do not build DX12 shaders. Preserve unrelated dirty work. Commit one checkpoint
after a meaningful slice has passed static/build gates and, where available,
runtime validation. Document measured results here, in the owning pass document,
and in 23_handover_2026_08_08.txt.

UPT-10A build checkpoint, 2026-08-09
------------------------------------

The first prepared-closure slice is implemented without changing a persistent
buffer, descriptor, dispatch, barrier, candidate count, random dimension, ray
ceiling, reservoir formula, or visibility rule.

The material-provider boundary now exposes a local prepared-direct-material
value. D0 prepares the primary receiver once before previous-best plus fresh
direct RIS. After a continuation hit, it resolves the secondary Doom material,
diffuse/specular textures, YCoCg conversion, GUI vertex-color policy, normal,
view direction, roughness, and F0 once before the secondary NEE loop. Each
candidate retains the exact direction-dependent OpenPBR evaluation, RGB F,
target, directional PDF, MIS, and inner-RIS UCW conversion. Existing unprepared
entry points remain wrappers for callers not yet migrated.

Verified gates:

    PathTraceSlangUpt04BackendClosure                 pass
    PathTraceSlangUpt07TemporalOwnership              pass
    cmake --build --preset win64-pt-dev-release       pass
    UPT-04 static family/material/repeatability gates pass
    UPT-07 temporal artifact gate                     pass
    UPT-09 spatial artifact gate                      pass
    PathTraceUnifiedPrimaryScheduleHarness            pass
    PathTraceUnifiedTemporalContractHarness           pass

The main compact32/geometry48/light64 D0 blob changed from 646,408 to
640,616 bytes, a 5,792-byte reduction. Its Material48 and continuation32
variants show the same 5,792-byte reduction. The temporal unified base artifact
is 923,084 bytes versus the previously reported 925,792-byte runtime blob;
T0 still uses its legacy evaluation call sites, so this is not yet a temporal
performance claim. Reflection and generated verification retained the accepted
64-byte reservoir, compact32 receiver, 48-byte material, and binding contracts.

Runtime image, energy, family timing, and Nsight stall acceptance remain open.
Do not advance to 10B from build evidence alone if the deployed fixed-sample
image changes or if family-0 timing regresses.
