UPT-19 Hardware-Opaque Geometry Partition
==========================================

Status
------

Implemented for Vulkan on 2026-08-10. UPT's Slang backend closure, the focused
CPU planning harness and the prescribed win64-pt-dev-release build are verified.
Deployment is verified below. Runtime image checks and matched Nsight
measurements remain pending at the time of this entry.

Verified root contract
----------------------

The reported low-level defect had two independent halves, both present in the
live renderer:

1. UPT production RayQuery and clean RTXDI visibility rays forced every
   candidate non-opaque.
2. The static and dynamic smoke BLAS builders never marked any geometry
   opaque. NVRHI's default geometry flags therefore left every triangle on the
   programmable candidate path even if the ray flag was corrected.

The production visibility contracts already stop finite shadow segments at
distance minus 0.5 Doom units. Removing the global force-nonopaque flag does
not require admitting the sampled emissive endpoint. Alpha-tested and other
coverage-dependent geometry still requires programmable candidate handling.

Why the BLAS cannot simply be marked opaque
--------------------------------------------

The existing static and dynamic BLAS each used one geometry containing mixed
materials. Marking that geometry opaque would bypass any-hit for alpha-tested,
glass, decal, liquid and other coverage-dependent triangles. It would fix the
profile by corrupting visibility.

The accepted partition is fixed 256-triangle geometry chunks over the existing
index order. A chunk receives GeometryFlags::Opaque only when every triangle's
resolved material metadata proves it is MC_OPAQUE and has none of the authored
coverage, transmission, decal, liquid, portal, object-glass or GUI fallback
features. Missing or uncertain metadata fails closed to programmable geometry.

No vertex/index reorder or per-frame remap buffer is added. The source triangle
address is recovered exactly as:

    canonicalPrimitive = GeometryIndex * 256 + PrimitiveIndex

Static bucket BLAS use the same chunk ceiling. Their packed triangle base is
then added to canonicalPrimitive through the established route. Rigid and
skinned entity BLAS retain one geometry and their existing local primitive
identity.

Shader correction
-----------------

UPT D0, direct T0/S0 and indirect T0 no longer set
RAY_FLAG_FORCE_NON_OPAQUE. Per-geometry opacity now decides whether traversal
commits in hardware or exposes a candidate for alpha clipping. Hardware hit
tuples are canonicalized before material lookup, emissive self-ignore,
reservoir identity or replay publication.

The same primitive-address correction is applied to the primary-surface
producer, smoke path, clean RTXDI hit adapters and Vulkan debug/GI consumers so
one shared TLAS cannot mean different triangle identities to different passes.
Clean GI paths that still deliberately force non-opaque retain that behavior;
only their address interpretation changes in this slice.

Controls and diagnostics
------------------------

    r_pathTracingHardwareOpaqueGeometry 1
        fixed-size partition and conservative per-chunk hardware opacity

    r_pathTracingHardwareOpaqueGeometry 0
        rollback to programmable chunks while preserving identical geometry
        indexing and shader identity

Changing the cvar invalidates the cached static BLAS. With
r_pathTracingSmokeLog 1, static and periodic dynamic BLAS creation report total,
opaque and programmable chunk counts. GEO10 bucket creation reports opaque and
programmable descriptor counts when replacement BLAS are built.

Runtime acceptance
------------------

1. Compare mode 0/1 with identical camera, clocks and UPT family settings.
2. Confirm the log reports a nonzero opaque chunk population in the tested
   scene; a zero count is a classification result, not a traversal win.
3. Verify alpha-clipped light covers, doors, level brushes, rigid props,
   mirrors and emissive self-visibility before accepting performance.
4. Capture D0 and indirect T0. The expected signal is fewer programmable
   candidate returns, higher RT-core dependency share and lower SM-side
   RayQuery/texture dependency, especially in high-overdraw level views.
5. Repeat the same check in clean RTXDI DI. Shared BLAS opacity benefits both
   renderers; it is not an estimator change and must not alter reservoirs,
   temporal/spatial admission or energy.

No DX12 shader is part of this work.

Build and deployment proof
--------------------------

The focused CPU planning harness passes the 257-triangle boundary case and
proves two descriptors with 256 and 1 triangles at unchanged source offsets.
The exact command from neo/ completed successfully:

    cmake --build --preset win64-pt-dev-release

The cache had BUILD_DXIL_SHADERS=OFF and
PATH_TRACING_BUILD_DXIL_RT_SHADERS=OFF. All UPT-04/05/07/08/09 Vulkan artifact
verifiers passed and RBDoom3BFG.exe linked at 16,312,832 bytes.

One already-dirty clean-GI producer source was pulled into the exact build. Its
ray-query compile shim lacked the shadow-payload overload. The stale affected
producer Vulkan blob was deleted before the minimal overload correction; the
replacement changed from 361,960 bytes dated 2026-08-02 to 363,016 bytes dated
2026-08-10 03:03 local time. The full rebuild then completed cleanly.

Deployment copied the executable plus the 105 Vulkan SPIR-V artifacts rebuilt
between 02:16 and 03:08 local time. Source/destination sizes and SHA-256 hashes
were checked after copying. No DX12 shader was compiled or deployed.

Follow-up: opacity invalidation and alpha ordering, 2026-08-10
--------------------------------------------------------------

The first implementation correctly changed the geometry layout when the
hardware-opacity cvar changed, but its long-lived monolithic static BLAS cache
still used the geometry-only signature. A material registry entry can acquire
or lose alpha/coverage metadata without changing the triangle material ID.
That transition changes GeometryFlags::Opaque and therefore must recreate the
BLAS even though vertex and index bytes remain identical.

The static cache now stores a separate hardware-opacity signature. It hashes
the cvar mode, triangle count, and the proven opaque/programmed result of each
fixed 256-triangle chunk. The signature is recomputed after material metadata
hydration, participates in the async acceleration-plan token, and invalidates
only when descriptor opacity would change. General material-only edits remain
outside the geometry signature. Static bucket BLAS input signatures include
the same classification result, so registry-only coverage changes cannot keep
a stale bucket descriptor either. With r_pathTracingSmokeLog 1, a monolithic
classification transition reports both old and new signatures.

UPT alpha traversal also no longer fetches a complete triangle before asking
whether alpha testing applies. The candidate route first resolves only the
material index, then reads only the flags member. Non-alpha candidates return
solid at that point. Only proven alpha candidates fetch indices, three vertex
records, the full material, and textures. Malformed, missing, out-of-range or
inconsistent routes still fail closed; this is a load-order correction, not a
new visibility admission path.

The CPU planning harness proves that the async acceleration token changes when
the opacity classification changes while preserving the existing rule that
ordinary material payload edits do not enter the geometry signature. The full
win64-pt-dev-release build and every UPT Vulkan verifier pass. The shared Slang
edit rebuilt 21 Vulkan SPIR-V artifacts and linked a 16,313,856-byte
executable; no DX12 shader was compiled.

Follow-up: CPU opacity-signature regression, 2026-08-10
-------------------------------------------------------

Runtime logging exposed a CPU regression after the invalidation fix: total
scene build was 169--189 ms while capture, material construction, buffer work,
BLAS and TLAS accounted for only a small fraction of that time. The opacity
signature walked every triangle, and SmokeMaterialCanUseHardwareOpaqueGeometry
resolved the material by value. Each query therefore copied the complete
RtSmokeMaterialTextureInfo, including its strings and resource handles. Static
bucket readiness called the signature from several validation paths, turning
that record copy into the dominant per-frame CPU cost.

The conservative hardware-opacity decision is now computed once when material
metadata is derived and stored as one CPU-only boolean in the registry record.
Resident metadata and variants preserve or recompute the bit. Per-triangle
signature walks now perform only the material-ID lookup and boolean read; the
classification inputs and fail-closed result are unchanged. This does not
weaken the opacity invalidation signature or change any shader ABI.

The exact win64-pt-dev-release build passes and links a 16,314,368-byte
executable. All Vulkan SPIR-V artifacts were already up to date, so this
follow-up deploys only RBDoom3BFG.exe and compiles no DX12 shader.
