UPT-43: bounded endpoint-cached temporal and spatial reuse
==========================================================

Status
------

Owning architecture and implementation order, 2026-08-12.

UPT-42 proved that a Gaussian self-inverting reuse texture fixes the visible
8x8 spatial structure, but its corrected scheduling changed performance by
only one or two frames. At 1920x1080 the current UPT temporal plus spatial
passes remain about 220 percent more frame time than the ReSTIR PT Enhanced
reference result. At the normal render resolution, setting the emissive scale
to zero can increase total frame rate by about 50 percent. The cost therefore
cannot be treated as a pairing-texture, boiling-filter or denoiser problem.

This document replaces incremental optimization of the current universal
replay megakernels with an RTXDI/ReSTIR-PT-shaped bounded reuse architecture.
ReSTIR PT Enhanced features remain desired, but they are layers on the bounded
base rather than reasons to preserve UPT's current expensive representation.

Reference finding
-----------------

The local RTXDI FullSample PT implementation is not the same estimator as
UPT: it keeps a separate DI path and normally disables primary-surface
emissive sampling in PT. It is nevertheless the closest available executable
implementation of the ReSTIR PT hybrid-shift representation from which the
Enhanced paper evolves.

Its 64-byte PT reservoir persists:

    reconnection world position and normal;
    outgoing incident radiance at that vertex;
    target function and reservoir weight;
    partial Jacobian and reconnection incident-direction PDF;
    reconnection length and selected path length;
    replay seed and random index.

The decisive reuse gate is:

    random replay is required only when RcVertexLength > 2.

An ordinary x1-to-x2 reconnection therefore performs no closest-hit path
trace. It evaluates the stored endpoint at the new receiver, updates the
cached Jacobian and optionally performs conservative connection visibility.
Only a later reconnection vertex replays the prefix before that vertex.

For an emissive-surface endpoint, initial sampling evaluates the material and
stores the endpoint position, normal and outgoing radiance. Temporal/spatial
reuse does not rediscover its triangle, vertices, UV basis, material or
emissive texture. For NEE, the reservoir stores the selected dense light
identity and sample coordinates. Temporal reuse performs one dense previous-
to-current remap and evaluates that exact sample; it never samples or searches
the light distribution again.

Current UPT mismatch
--------------------

UPT has a unified 64-byte reservoir, but its representation is primarily a
recipe for reconstructing a sample rather than a cached reconnection
endpoint. Consequently:

* every direct-emissive T0/S0 mapping resolves the emitter triangle through
  the general geometry router;
* it samples four emitter texture probes to reconstruct the bounded
  four-region proposal PDF, then samples the selected endpoint texture;
* global mappings generally perform closest-hit continuation replay even when
  the stored reconnection length and x2 locator identify a cheap connection;
* temporal reciprocal evaluation and spatial reciprocal mapping inline the
  replay, geometry, material, light and visibility closures in large kernels;
* emissive population, geometry routes and selected path type therefore
  change reuse cost drastically even at fixed resolution and bounce depth.

This is why emissive scale zero is a major performance switch in UPT but not
in the FullSample PT path. The dependence is not an inherent ReSTIR PT cost.

Target cost contract
--------------------

Steady T0/S0 work must approach:

    active pixels
      x configured temporal/spatial mappings
      x bounded replay-prefix length

The total light count, total emissive count and unrelated geometry population
must not multiply reuse work. They may affect D0 proposal generation and BVH
traversal coherence, but not introduce a candidate loop, CDF search, hash
search or general emitter reconstruction into each reuse mapping.

For an ordinary direct or x2-reconnectable path, the hot mapping must contain:

    one reservoir decode;
    at most one previous-to-current dense identity remap when needed;
    receiver BSDF/target evaluation;
    bounded Jacobian arithmetic;
    at most one connection-visibility query when estimator validity needs it;
    reservoir merge arithmetic.

It must contain zero closest-hit replay rays and zero emitter material/texture
probes used only to reconstruct already-known sampling state.

Event-specific reservoir arms
-----------------------------

The physical reservoir remains 64 bytes. Its packed words are event-specific
unions; a future slice may reassign fields only after a complete producer and
consumer audit and an ABI-generation bump.

Direct and secondary NEE arm:

    stable light identity;
    stored light sample coordinates;
    exact receiver-invariant sampling-PDF payload;
    cached endpoint data needed by the selected reconnection;
    path/reconnection lengths and replay identity.

BSDF-hit emissive arm:

    exact endpoint world position and normal;
    evaluated outgoing radiance;
    partial Jacobian/reconnection PDF terms;
    dynamic validity identity or generation;
    path/reconnection lengths and replay identity.

Later-reconnection arm:

    cached reconnection endpoint and suffix radiance;
    replay seed/index for only the prefix before the reconnection vertex;
    partial Jacobian and incident-direction PDF;
    explicit path and reconnection lengths.

Static cached endpoint data may be consumed directly. A temporal dynamic,
rigid or skinned endpoint must validate a stable generation/identity and
recover current position exactly or reject. No stale world-space endpoint may
be admitted merely to avoid replay. Same-frame spatial use may consume exact
same-frame cached data.

Implementation stages
---------------------

S43.1 Direct-emissive PDF payload

D0 already computes the exact receiver-invariant four-region selection-PDF
scale and leaves it in Upt04LocalLightSample.reserved. Secondary emissive NEE
already persists the same value as the established negative proposalPdf union
arm. Extend that collision-free payload to non-global direct emissives:

* carry the exact scale through fresh and previous-best D0 selection;
* encode it only after D0 streaming/finalization;
* consume it in direct T0/S0 instead of four material/texture probes;
* republish it after every accepted direct shift so it survives later frames;
* retain one selected endpoint texture evaluation until S43.2;
* bump UPT04_ABI_VERSION so old history cannot be decoded under the new arm.

This changes neither the proposal density nor the reservoir weight convention.
Missing, malformed or out-of-range payloads reject; they do not fall back to
an expensive or approximate proposal.

S43.2 Exact endpoint cache

Add an exact producer-owned endpoint representation. Prefer data already
available while capturing the emissive inventory over a shader-side general
geometry lookup. It must reconstruct the selected triangle endpoint exactly,
including position, normal, UV/material identity and dynamic validity. The
first accepted version may keep one endpoint emission texture sample; the
target architecture stores evaluated outgoing radiance for immutable/static
endpoints and validates dynamic endpoints explicitly.

The first accepted representation is an ordinal-aligned 64-byte current-frame
emissive geometry sidecar, not a per-pixel endpoint buffer and not an extension
of the legacy 144-byte emissive record:

    float4 position0AndUv0X;
    float4 position1AndUv0Y;
    float4 position2AndUv1X;
    float  uv1Y;
    uint   identityHashLo;
    uint   identityHashHi;
    uint   validity;

UV2 is reconstructed exactly as three times the existing centroid UV minus
UV0 and UV1. Material index, triangle class/flags and centroid UV remain owned
by the matching 144-byte record. The sidecar identity must match both that
record and the selected current light; validity uses an explicit non-zero
magic. Any count, identity or validity mismatch rejects.

Every CPU emissive capture route publishes the sidecar in the same operation
that appends its legacy record: static bucket, dynamic, rigid, world-static
supplement and current skinned output. The two arrays must have identical
counts before upload. Temporal history first remaps its stable light identity
to the current dense universe and then loads the current light's source
ordinal, so moving rigid/skinned emitters use current-frame vertices rather
than stale cached world positions. Spatial uses the same current-frame data.

The sidecar is sized by emissive inventory count, not screen resolution, is
uploaded with the existing scene publication, and is never fully cleared.
It replaces only selected-emissive triangle reconstruction. General geometry
buffers remain available for continuation/BSDF hits until later stages. S43.2
therefore requires direct and secondary-NEE emissive replay to issue zero
calls to Upt04ResolveTriangle while preserving the exact barycentric point,
geometric normal, solid-angle PDF, UV gradients and one endpoint emission
evaluation.

S43.3 Trace-free x2 reconnection

Make the stored reconnection length and x2 endpoint the production common
path. Remove the existing exclusion between pairwise reuse and early
reconnection. A successful x2 mapping uses no closest-hit continuation ray.
Connection visibility remains explicit and distinct from winner visibility.
The old exact replay path remains the rollback and unsupported-path fallback.

S43.3 live packed-arm contract
--------------------------------

The pre-S43.3 rcLength=2 arm was not a cached endpoint. Words 13..15 held only
an instance/primitive/barycentric locator. Every mapping therefore decoded the
general geometry route, loaded and evaluated the x2 material twice, and the
old experimental implementation also traced receiver-to-x2 visibility before
selection. It was measured about 6 ms slower than exact replay and was
mutually exclusive with the accepted shared-reuse adapter. That route is not
the S43.3 implementation.

S43.3 reassigns only the secondary-NEE arm whose pathLength and
reconnectionVertexLength are both two:

    word 2      current-domain selected-light index + 1;
    word 3      octahedral x2 geometric normal;
    words 4..5  replay seed and index for exact fallback identity;
    word 6      selected-light sample coordinates;
    words 7..9  cached outgoing x2 suffix radiance;
    word 10     target at the reservoir's current receiver;
    word 11     UPT target-scaled reservoir weight;
    word 12     exact selected-light proposal/PDF payload;
    words 13..15 exact x2 world position.

This is an event-specific reinterpretation of the existing 64-byte page. It
does not widen the reservoir or allocate a screen-sized endpoint sidecar.
UPT04_ABI_VERSION must change before the new arm is consumed across frames.

The producer may publish this arm only when x2 has a stable static geometry
route and the selected x2 suffix is finite and positive. A temporal consumer
must additionally translate the stored previous light index through the
CPU-built previous-to-current map and require a current stable payload:

* analytic lights require STABLE_CACHEABLE, which proves identity and exact
  position/radius/radiance continuity;
* emissive lights reject the existing dynamic-history flag and require the
  stable light remap; their exact current triangle endpoint remains available
  through the S43.2 emissive geometry sidecar;
* spatial consumers use the same current-frame light universe and may consume
  the current cached suffix directly.

Missing remaps, unstable lights, malformed endpoint data, back-facing or zero
geometry terms, invalid targets and unavailable visibility requests reject
the cached mapping. They never admit an approximate zero or stale sample to
increase reservoir density. Exact replay remains the fallback for rcLength=1,
dynamic/rigid/skinned x2, later/specular paths and any rejected cache proof.

The cached suffix follows the RTXDI PT reservoir contract: it is radiance
leaving the stored reconnection vertex toward the prefix. The new receiver
evaluates only its primary OpenPBR term and the source/target partial geometry
ratio. As in RTXDI PT's footprint reconnect, the suffix BSDF is not reevaluated
for the changed incoming prefix direction. This is the single deliberate
hybrid-shift approximation in this arm; it is bounded to stable, reconnectible
x2 samples and must remain separately diagnosable from exact replay.

Mapping and visibility budget:

    one reservoir decode;
    zero continuation closest-hit rays;
    zero x2 geometry resolves or x2 material/texture loads;
    at most one previous-to-current light remap and one current-light load;
    one primary-receiver material evaluation;
    zero visibility traversal before reservoir selection;
    receiver-to-x2 visibility only for the selected winner.

The cached suffix begins at x2 and already contains the selected x2-to-light
connection as evaluated and visibility-proved by its source frame. Re-tracing
that suffix in T0 would double-test a segment that is not part of the changed
prefix. S43.3 therefore retains the existing one-request pending-visibility
record and replaces it with the receiver-to-x2 request. It adds no persistent
buffer and cannot exceed one winner-only visibility ray. Diagnostics
distinguish cached-x2 attempted, admitted, exact-replay fallback, and cached-x2
winners.

S43.4 Replay classification and compaction

Classify mappings before path tracing:

    direct endpoint;
    trace-free x2 reconnect;
    later/specular random-replay fallback;
    invalid/rejected.

Only the later/specular population enters a compact replay dispatch. Reuse the
bounded no-full-clear queue rules from UPT-20: reset only counters/indirect
arguments, bound reads by the published count, and never clear a full work
buffer each frame. Do not compact universal replay before S43.3 makes the
fallback population sparse.

S43.4 temporal implementation contract, 2026-08-12
---------------------------------------------------

The accepted T0 estimator remains the oracle. S43.4 specializes it into two
entry shapes without changing reservoir math:

    T0a classify/common:
        one 8x8 full-screen dispatch;
        direct shifts execute normally;
        cached-x2 shifts execute normally;
        invalid mappings reject normally;
        the first operation that would construct and trace a continuation ray
        returns NEEDS_COMPACT_REPLAY, appends the current pixel index and
        publishes the untouched D0 reservoir for that pixel.

    T0b exact replay:
        one 64x1 compute-indirect dispatch over only appended indices;
        reload the authoritative current/history reservoirs and receivers;
        recompute reprojection and execute the unmodified exact-replay T0 path;
        overwrite the same current page entry.

The compact record is one uint currentPixelIndex. It intentionally does not
store decoded reservoirs, mapped endpoints, targets, Jacobians or visibility
requests. Recomputing reprojection in T0b costs work only for the sparse replay
population and prevents a queue item from becoming a second temporal state
contract.

The 20-byte control buffer is:

    uint groupCountX;
    uint groupCountY;
    uint groupCountZ;
    uint publishedCount;
    uint capacity;

At frame start the CPU writes only { 0, 1, 1, 0, surfaceCount }. The append
uses one atomic slot reservation, writes the pixel only when slot < capacity,
and atomically raises groupCountX to ceil((slot + 1) / 64). T0b clamps its read
against min(publishedCount, capacity). The queue capacity is one uint per
screen pixel, but its contents are never cleared. Overflow leaves that pixel's
D0 result intact and cannot launch outside the allocated queue.

The classify specialization must compile without the continuation-trace and
endpoint-reconstruction closure. Merely branching around that code at runtime
does not satisfy S43.4 because it retains the register and instruction
footprint in every full-screen lane. The compact specialization retains exact
replay and uses the same bindings, push constants, reservoir ABI, common-GRIS
merge and winner visibility rules as the oracle.

The first runtime gate is default-off and effective only for the accepted
unified compact64-light, duplication, shared-adapter/common-GRIS temporal
configuration with diagnostic/frozen/early-reconnect specializations absent.
The three-vertex specialization is supported by a matching classify/compact
pair. Direct-only, legacy temporal, bottleneck probes and route diagnostics
remain on their existing single dispatch.

Acceptance adds these proof obligations:

    compactedCount <= surfaceCount;
    indirect groups are exactly ceil(compactedCount / 64);
    zero compacted pixels launch zero T0b work;
    T0a plus T0b is visually equivalent to the monolithic oracle;
    direct and cached-x2 mappings never enter T0b;
    no full-screen queue clear occurs;
    timing covers T0a, the UAV/indirect barrier and T0b together.

S43.5 Paper-shaped paired spatial execution

After mapping cost is bounded, replace the reciprocal leader megakernel with
the Enhanced two-stage execution:

    full-occupancy shift prepass;
    pure resampling/publication pass.

Retain the accepted self-inverting Gaussian texture and exact reciprocal MIS.
The intermediate record must be the smallest mapping result needed by the
second pass; do not allocate another general 64-byte history page without a
measured byte/traffic justification. The pass boundary must reduce live
replay state and register pressure, not merely move the same large closure to
another dispatch.

S43.6 Enhanced layers

Once the bounded base is accepted, restore or extend:

    footprint-based reconnection criteria;
    forced NEE light reconnection;
    reciprocal Gaussian pairing and additional neighbors if affordable;
    duplication-map history control;
    temporal boiling/disocclusion handling;
    optional three-vertex and later-bounce replay;
    denoiser/RR integration.

These features must not reintroduce light-distribution search, universal
closest-hit replay or emitter reconstruction into the common mapping.

Required diagnostics
--------------------

T0 and S0 require separate per-frame and per-pixel-normalized counters for:

    direct analytic mappings;
    direct emissive mappings;
    secondary NEE analytic mappings;
    secondary NEE emissive mappings;
    BSDF-hit emissive endpoints;
    reconnection-length histogram;
    trace-free reconnect attempts/successes/rejections;
    random-replay mappings by prefix length;
    dense stable-ID remap loads and failures;
    light-distribution searches;
    emissive geometry resolves;
    emitter material loads and texture probes;
    closest-hit continuation rays;
    connection-visibility rays;
    winner-visibility rays;
    compacted replay count and dispatch size.

The counters declare a budget, not merely observability. Production acceptance
requires ordinary direct-emissive and x2 mappings to report zero closest-hit
replay rays. After S43.1 direct-emissive mappings must report zero four-region
texture probes. After S43.2 static direct-emissive mappings must report zero
general geometry resolves.

Acceptance and rollback
-----------------------

Each stage remains default-off or has a byte-identical/behavioral rollback
until runtime accepted. Compare settled batches with fixed camera/RNG state,
16 warm-up frames and 64 timing samples; require two agreeing batches.

Acceptance requires:

1. Existing direct analytic and emissive energy remains unchanged.
2. No missing, duplicated, ghost, white or color-corrupted emitters appear.
3. Dynamic/rigid/skinned endpoints never consume stale cached positions.
4. Temporal/spatial-off D0 remains unchanged apart from ABI invalidation.
5. T0/S0 cost becomes primarily resolution, mapping-count and bounce-depth
   dependent rather than light/emissive population dependent.
6. Emissive scale zero no longer removes a large structural T0/S0 workload.
7. The accepted compact32, compact64-light, proposal-parity, duplication,
   shared DI/GI reservoir, empty-rescue and optional three-vertex paths remain
   available.
8. No per-frame full-buffer clear is added.
9. No DX12 shader is compiled or deployed.

Build and deployment
--------------------

Build only the Vulkan lane from neo:

    cmake --build --preset win64-pt-dev-release

Deploy RBDoom3BFG.exe and only Vulkan SPIR-V rebuilt by the accepted slice.
Preserve the dirty worktree and checkpoint only after a meaningful runtime-
verified stage.

S43.1 implementation status, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------------

S43.1 is implemented, Vulkan-built and deployed for runtime validation.

The direct D0 fresh and legacy-shaped previous-best paths now carry the exact
four-region emissive replay PDF scale that they already compute. Reservoir
finalization publishes it in the established negative word12 event union for
both direct and secondary emissive NEE. T0 and S0 decode that payload, retain
one exact endpoint emission evaluation, and no longer call the four-point
region-weight evaluator. Successful direct shifts republish the same payload;
the physical proposal PDF remains in pathPdf for estimator math. Analytic
lights keep their ordinary positive word12 proposal PDF.

UPT04_ABI_VERSION is 12. Old primary-emissive history therefore fails the page
generation contract without a buffer clear. Missing, zero, positive or out-of-
range emissive payloads fail closed rather than falling back to the removed
four-probe reconstruction.

The required Vulkan build completed successfully. One executable and exactly
21 rebuilt Vulkan SPIR-V blobs were deployed. No DX12 shader was compiled or
deployed. Runtime image/performance acceptance and the checkpoint remain
pending.

S43.2 implementation status, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------------

S43.2 is implemented, Vulkan-built and deployed for runtime validation.

Every current emissive inventory record now has an ordinal-aligned 64-byte
exact geometry sidecar. Static-bucket, dynamic, rigid and world-static CPU
capture routes append the record and sidecar together. Count parity is checked
before upload and any mismatch invalidates the complete sidecar rather than
admitting misaddressed geometry. The existing skinned-emissive GPU publication
dispatch now writes the same sidecar from post-skinning current vertices and
explicitly invalidates it when publication is unavailable.

D0, T0 and S0 bind the sidecar at set 0 binding 32. Selected emissive replay
validates the current light, legacy record, sidecar magic and both identity
hash words, reconstructs UV2 from the existing centroid UV, and performs exact
barycentric position/UV interpolation. The old Upt04ResolveTriangle and
Upt04BuildGeometryHitSurface route is absent from the shared emissive replay
module. Area, oriented normal, solid-angle PDF, UV gradients and the single
endpoint emission evaluation remain unchanged. Missing, stale or mismatched
geometry rejects; there is no fallback to general routing or approximate data.

UPT04_ABI_VERSION is 13. The full Vulkan build and descriptor/ray-ceiling
verification completed successfully. The executable, the skinned publication
compute blob, and exactly 18 rebuilt UPT D0/T0/S0 Vulkan blobs were deployed;
no DX12 shader was compiled or deployed. Runtime image/performance acceptance
and the checkpoint remain pending. Use the existing `exec uptf2.cfg` baseline;
no additional cvar is required.

S43.2 runtime acceptance, 2026-08-12
------------------------------------

The deployed `uptf2.cfg` production baseline completed runtime validation with
no visual issues. At 2560x1440, after 16 warm-up frames and over 64 dispatch-
only timing samples:

    temporal median: 11.100 ms;
    temporal mean:   11.102 ms;
    temporal range:  11.003 to 11.262 ms;
    spatial median:   1.072 ms;
    spatial mean:     1.084 ms.

The immediately preceding S43.1 temporal baseline at the same resolution was
14.679 ms. Exact endpoint geometry therefore removed 3.579 ms from the median
temporal dispatch, a 24.4 percent reduction. Spatial remained effectively
unchanged from its preceding 1.063 ms median, as expected for a pass already
dominated by the accepted workgroup pairing path rather than emitter geometry
routing. S43.2 is accepted for image correctness and performance. The next
stage is S43.3 trace-free x2 reconnection.

S43.3 implementation status, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------------

S43.3 is implemented, Vulkan-built and deployed for runtime validation.

The 64-byte secondary-NEE rcLength=2 reservoir arm now stores the exact x2
world position, octahedrally packed x2 normal and the already evaluated x2
suffix radiance. D0 publishes this arm only for stable static x2 hits. T0 and
S0 map it by evaluating the primary material at the new receiver; they do not
trace a continuation ray, decode x2 geometry, or evaluate the x2 material.
Unsupported or unstable endpoints retain the exact random-replay fallback.

Temporal history first remaps the stored light to the current dense universe.
Analytic history requires StableCacheable and dynamic emissive history is
rejected. The receiver-to-x2 visibility request remains transient through the
mapping. The x2-to-light request is deliberately not carried per proposal: it
is reconstructed from the selected reservoir only after that proposal wins.
Thus both visibility segments are proven without expanding the reservoir,
groupshared pair records, or every losing mapping.

Resolve reconstructs the cached-x2 contribution from the current primary
receiver and stored suffix radiance. UPT04_ABI_VERSION is 14, so older history
is invalidated by page generation without a full-buffer clear. Compact32,
compact64 lights, proposal parity, duplication/shared reuse, empty rescue and
three-vertex variants all compiled. Static SPIR-V proofs report five RayQuery
sites for common temporal, seven for three-vertex temporal and eight for
three-vertex spatial; the only added site is winner-only suffix visibility,
and all retain TraceRay=0.

The required Vulkan preset completed successfully. RBDoom3BFG.exe and exactly
21 rebuilt UPT04/05/07/09 Vulkan blobs were deployed. No DX12 shader was
compiled or deployed. Runtime image and timing acceptance remain pending.

S43.3 first runtime result, 2026-08-12
--------------------------------------

Visual validation passed, but performance acceptance failed. At 2560x1440
the temporal median was 11.787 ms versus the accepted S43.2 11.100 ms, a
0.687 ms / 6.2 percent regression. Spatial remained effectively flat at
1.096 ms versus 1.072 ms. S43.3 must not be checkpointed or promoted in this
state.

Probe 12 now contains production-shaped shared-adapter/common-GRIS estimator
logic plus four diagnostic-only route counters: cached-x2 attempted, admitted,
fallback, and selected winner. These counters compile away from production.
The corrected probe blob was explicitly rebuilt after discovering that the
production preset did not rebuild this diagnostic target from imported-source
changes. Its deployed SHA-256 is
1F5F9DA6B3F51CCE371FD3E427DED1C4B76628A7F72E782EE8D0BA8C2F4957F5.
The next decision is gated on that route population, not another speculative
visibility or estimator change.

S43.3 corrected runtime timing, 2026-08-12
------------------------------------------

Probe 12 established that cached-x2 coverage was not the regression source:
855175 of 862112 attempts admitted (99.2 percent), only 6937 fell back, and
260374 cached samples won. The faulty implementation nevertheless emitted two
final-indirect visibility rays for each cached winner. The second ray retraced
x2-to-light even though the stored suffix radiance begins at x2 and therefore
already represents that proven suffix. Reconnection changes the receiver-to-x2
prefix only. Removing the redundant suffix ray restored the original static
RayQuery ceilings while retaining current receiver-to-x2 visibility.

The corrected production `uptf2.cfg` run confirmed every intended gate was
effective: shared adapter, common GRIS, shared spatial, stored source target,
workgroup pairing and empty rescue. At 2560x1440 after 16 warm-ups and 64
dispatch-only samples:

    corrected temporal median:  9.994 ms;
    corrected temporal mean:   10.089 ms;
    corrected temporal range:   9.771 to 11.541 ms;
    corrected spatial median:   1.072 ms;
    corrected spatial mean:     1.082 ms.

This is 1.106 ms / 10.0 percent faster than the accepted S43.2 temporal
baseline of 11.100 ms and 1.793 ms / 15.2 percent faster than the faulty
two-ray S43.3 result of 11.787 ms. Spatial exactly matches the accepted S43.2
median. Performance acceptance passes. Final promotion/checkpoint remains
gated only on visual and motion validation of this corrected suffix-reuse
build, because the earlier visual pass covered the superseded two-ray build.

S43.3 final acceptance, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------

Corrected-build visual and motion validation passed with no observed issue.
S43.3 is accepted: cached-x2 reconnection reduces temporal dispatch time by
10.0 percent against S43.2 while preserving the exact accepted spatial median,
emissive appearance, motion behavior and bounded reservoir/visibility
contracts. The implementation may now be checkpointed. The next UPT-43 stage
is bounded replay-prefix compaction; do not revive the superseded static-
locator experiment or its redundant suffix visibility ray.

S43.4 implementation and static verification, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------------------------------

S43.4 temporal replay compaction is implemented, Vulkan-built and deployed for
runtime validation behind `r_pathTracingUnifiedPtTemporalReplayCompaction 1`.
The gate remains default-off and is effective only on the accepted unified,
compact64-light, duplication, shared-adapter/common-GRIS production path.

T0a retains the 8x8 screen dispatch but returns immediately before exact
continuation replay. It appends only that pixel index, leaves its D0 reservoir
untouched and compiles to two RayQuery sites versus four in the accepted
monolithic common-GRIS shader. T0b consumes the bounded uint queue in a 64x1
compute-indirect dispatch, recomputes authoritative temporal state and retains
the oracle's four RayQuery sites. The optional three-vertex pair reports two
and six sites respectively. This proves the expensive replay closure is absent
from the full-screen shader rather than merely skipped by a runtime branch.

The queue is four bytes per screen pixel and is never cleared. Each frame
resets only three dispatch words plus two metadata words. The GPU-published
count is clamped to capacity and dispatch groups are raised to
ceil(published/64). Overflow retains D0. Optional one-frame-delayed diagnostics
are enabled with
`r_pathTracingUnifiedPtTemporalReplayCompactionDiagnostics 1` and report
published/bounded/capacity, actual/expected groups, overflow and PASS/FAIL.

The required full Vulkan build passed. Runtime image, motion, queue-count and
timing acceptance remain pending; do not checkpoint or enable this path by
default until those results are recorded.

S43.4 first runtime performance result, 2026-08-12
---------------------------------------------------

The accepted production gate was confirmed effective in all eleven positions:
common GRIS, temporal, indirect, unified family, compact64 lights, duplication,
OpenPBR, no frozen diagnostic, no bottleneck probe, no early reconnect and no
route diagnostic all reported 1.

At 2560x1440 after 16 warm-up frames and 64 dispatch-only samples, temporal
replay compaction reduced the temporal median from 10.348 ms to 3.043 ms. This
is a 7.305 ms / 70.6 percent reduction. Mean time was 3.068 ms, minimum 2.991
ms, p90 3.073 ms and maximum 4.053 ms.

The queue ledger reported 127816 published and bounded pixels out of a
3686400-pixel capacity: 3.47 percent of the screen entered exact continuation
replay. The indirect dispatch reported 1998 actual and expected 64x1 groups,
one group in Y and Z, zero overflow and PASS. This validates the intended
work-topology change: the expensive continuation closure is no longer paid by
the other 96.53 percent of pixels.

Performance, queue bounds and indirect-dispatch arithmetic pass decisively.
Final S43.4 acceptance and checkpoint remain gated on visual and motion parity
for this exact compacted build. The gate remains default-off until that result
is recorded.

S43.4 final acceptance, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------

Visual and motion validation of the exact compacted build passed with no
observed issue. S43.4 is accepted at 3.043 ms temporal median versus 10.348 ms
without compaction, with 3.47 percent replay density, exact indirect group
arithmetic and zero overflow. The bounded replay-prefix split may now be
checkpointed. Preserve the monolithic path as the default-off comparison until
the next accepted configuration/default-promotion pass.

S43.5 implementation and static verification, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------------------------------

The first spatial topology experiment is implemented behind the default-off
`r_pathTracingUnifiedPtSpatialShiftPrepass 1` gate. It requires the accepted
common-GRIS shared-spatial path plus stored source targets, workgroup pairing,
empty-center rescue and the UPT-42 Gaussian reuse texture. Multi-neighbor and
three-vertex modes reject the gate rather than silently selecting a mismatched
shader.

S0a dispatches one coalesced 8x8 thread per screen pixel. Each lane evaluates
only its source-to-Gaussian-partner mapping and overwrites one 16-byte scalar
record containing source target, destination target, shift Jacobian and
mapping status/route. The buffer is sized to the active pixel count, persists
across frames and is never cleared. S0b reads both reciprocal scalar records,
performs the exact accepted pairwise merge and publishes the local result.
The canonical winner needs no reconstruction. A selected neighbor is
deterministically materialized only after it wins so the existing candidate
payload and winner-only visibility contract remain unchanged. This is a
bounded intermediate experiment rather than a second 64-byte history page.

The two stages share binding 30 as a structured UAV and are separated by an
explicit UAV barrier. Static SPIR-V verification proves 8x8 dispatch for both,
one RayQuery site in the full-screen mapping prepass and six in the conditional
resample/materialization shader, versus nine in the rejected monolithic
Gaussian leader kernel. It also proves the binding, full-frame overwrite and
host barrier markers. Both Vulkan shaders and the full release executable
build successfully. Runtime correctness and timing acceptance remain pending;
the accepted UPT-33 spatial path remains unchanged when the gate is zero.

S43.5 first runtime performance result, 2026-08-12
---------------------------------------------------

The requested/effective gate reported 1/1 with workgroup pairing, empty-center
rescue, Gaussian reuse texture and no multi-neighbor all enabled. At 2560x1440
after 16 warm-up frames and 64 dispatch-only samples, the original Gaussian
screen-leader kernel measured 8.316 ms median and 8.337 ms mean. The split
shift-prepass path measured 3.370 ms median and 3.383 ms mean, with a 3.321 ms
minimum, 3.388 ms p90 and 3.789 ms maximum.

The split therefore removes 4.946 ms / 59.5 percent of Gaussian spatial time
in this view. Its fully overwritten intermediate contains 3686400 records at
16 bytes each, 58982400 bytes / 56.25 MiB total, with no clear. Performance
acceptance passes decisively. Final S43.5 acceptance and checkpoint remain
gated on visual and motion parity for this exact build. The accepted adjacent
UPT-33 path remains substantially cheaper at roughly 1.07 ms, so promotion of
the Gaussian path is a separate quality-versus-cost decision.

S43.5 final acceptance, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------

Extended visual and motion validation of the exact split-prepass build passed
with no observed issue. No portal/area-boundary, disocclusion, emissive-edge or
reciprocal-pair artifact was found. S43.5 is accepted at 3.370 ms Gaussian
spatial median versus 8.316 ms for the monolithic screen-leader implementation,
a 59.5 percent reduction with exact image parity in the tested content. The
gate remains default-off: promoting Gaussian reuse over the approximately
1.07 ms adjacent UPT-33 production path is a later quality-versus-cost choice.

S43.6 temporal boiling-filter implementation, 2026-08-12
----------------------------------------------------------

The first enhanced layer is implemented behind the default-off
`r_pathTracingUnifiedPtTemporalBoilingFilter 1` gate. It requires accepted
S43.4 replay compaction and runs as a separate ray-free 8x8 T0c dispatch after
T0b has finalized queued pixels. One UAV barrier separates replay from the
filter; the existing temporal timer encloses all three stages.

The FullSample rule was translated to UPT's actual persisted convention:
word11 is already target-scaled UCW, so it is consumed directly and is not
multiplied by target again. Finite positive values are averaged over the 8x8
group and values above `(10 / strength - 9) * average` are rejected. Rejection
zeros the complete reservoir. Strength defaults to 0.2, giving a 41x threshold.

The pass has one 64-byte-stride reservoir UAV, 16 bytes of push constants and
no scene/light/material/history bindings or rays. Static verification and the
full Vulkan release build pass. Runtime image, motion, firefly and incremental
timing acceptance remain pending; details and exact A/B commands are in
`60_upt43_temporal_boiling_filter.txt`. The test must explicitly enable
`r_pathTracingUnifiedPtTemporalReplayCompaction 1`; `uptf2.cfg` does not set
that prerequisite.

S43.6 runtime acceptance, 2026-08-13
------------------------------------

With replay compaction explicitly enabled, the boiling-filter gate reported
requested/effective=1/1, strength 0.2 and the expected 41x threshold. Visual
testing passed without issue. At 2560x1440 over 64 samples after 16 warm-ups,
the temporal median moved from 3.266 ms with the filter off to 3.339 ms with it
on: 0.073 ms / 2.2 percent incremental cost. S43.6 is accepted and may be
checkpointed. Keep it default-off until the later biased-quality preset
decision.

S43.7 temporal permutation implementation, 2026-08-13
------------------------------------------------------

The next bounded temporal A/B implements RTXDI PT's exact first-history-tap
permutation behind default-off
`r_pathTracingUnifiedPtTemporalPermutationSampling 1`. JenkinsHash(frameIndex)
provides one frame-uniform word and the reprojected coordinate receives the
shifted 4x4 x/y XOR-by-3 map before the existing signed bounds and surface
compatibility tests. Probes 1 through 8 are unchanged.

The toggle uses free runtime bit 21 in geometryAvailabilityFlags. It adds no
specialization, push-constant bytes, ABI generation, resource, clear, dispatch
or ray. The S43.4 classifier and compact consumer recompute the same permuted
history receiver from the same frame index. RTXDI PT defaults this feature off
and UPT does too. The focused verifier and full Vulkan release build pass, and
the executable plus ten rebuilt temporal SPIR-V blobs were deployed with exact
source/deployed hash matches. Runtime timing at 2560x1440 regressed from a
3.570 ms median to 3.794 ms, +0.224 ms or +6.3 percent. S43.7 therefore remains
a default-off diagnostic and is not promoted into production configurations.
The exact contract and A/B are in
`61_upt43_temporal_permutation_sampling.txt`.

S43.8 sparse disocclusion-boost plan, 2026-08-13
-------------------------------------------------

The remaining RTXDI PT enhanced layer is now bounded by the exact reference
trigger: reconnection vertex length two and effective M below eight. It is not
an age-zero heuristic and it does not admit longer random-replay paths.

The accepted UPT-33 pass remains the full-screen one-neighbor base. Its S43.8
specialization appends only triggered pixels, then a 64x1 indirect compact pass
replaces those outputs with one simultaneous canonical-plus-N-neighbor GRIS
estimate. It reuses S43.4's queue/meta/indirect buffers after T0, resets only
20 bytes and adds no full-resolution allocation or clear. Donors remain in the
immutable temporal input page while the compact pass overwrites the completed
spatial output page.

The rejected UPT-34 full-screen multi-neighbor artifact remains rejected. The
default-off S43.8 gate requires S43.4 and UPT-33, rejects Gaussian, permutation
and three-vertex variants, caps the boost at eight reference samples, and owns
explicit queue/group/overflow diagnostics. The full contract is document 62.

S43.8 implementation ready for runtime A/B, 2026-08-13
-------------------------------------------------------

The sparse lane is implemented, Vulkan-built and deployed. The accepted
UPT-33 8x8 pass publishes only exact non-rescue x2 reservoirs with effective M
below eight. A 64x1 compute-indirect consumer performs up to eight
simultaneous-GRIS neighbor techniques only for that queue and leaves the
already complete UPT-33 output untouched on every failure.

The compact lane excludes a donor whose replay identity equals the canonical
center as well as duplicates among donors. It reads donors from the immutable
temporal page, performs winner-only visibility, and writes only finite valid
results. Static verification passes with bounded 5/4 classifier/compact
RayQuery-site ceilings, no TraceRay and no native16. Full runtime visual,
queue-density and incremental timing evidence remains required; use the exact
commands in document 62.

S43.8 runtime rejection, 2026-08-13
-----------------------------------

The sparse mechanism engaged correctly: 199470/3686400 pixels (5.41 percent),
3117/3117 indirect groups, zero overflow and PASS. At 2560x1440 the spatial
median rose from 1.063 ms to 3.735 ms, +2.672 ms / +251.4 percent over UPT-33.
Despite that extra work, visual testing showed no observable improvement to
the temporal ghosting under investigation. Keep S43.8 default-off as a
verified diagnostic and do not promote or tune it as the ghosting remedy.
This result narrows the next audit to temporal history validity, mapping/replay
acceptance and consumption rather than insufficient spatial disocclusion
neighbors.
